Tags: #Terminology #CompArch 

Bus Arbitration 

Every Input will give an output 

Bus Arbitration – Process by which a bus master accesses a control bus 

Bus Master/Controller - Has access to any bus 

Bus Arbiter – Decide who will become the current bus master 

Centralized Bus Arbitration – One single bus arbiter makes all decisions 

Daisy Chain – All share the same line; First in line has priority 

Independent Request – Each bus has it's own line; Built-in Priority Decoder 

Polling Method – Similar to daisy by rotates priority and can dynamically change to give equal opportunity 

Distributed Bus Arbitration – Each device is involved in the selection/turn; Assigned a 4-bit identifier number. Multiple request at a time. 

Bus Protocol 

Serial Communication – Asynchronous; One bit at a time and riles on handshaking 

Parallel Communication – Synchronous; Group of bits and relies on a clock signal; Only for short distances 

I/O Control Methods 

**4 main types of I/O** 

Programmed I/O - CONSTANT scanning to see if the input device has any data to transfer (EX: Scanning a document) 

Interrupt Based I/O - Sends an interrupt signal when it is ready to send data. Stops the CPU. (EX: Mouse click or button pressed on the keyboard). 

Direct Memory Access I/O - See below, but it allows Direct Access to the Memory without going through the CPU. 

Channel I/O - Similar to DMA, but has built in hardware to help complete tasks. Uses a buffer to hold data while it's transferred to/from memory. Typically only found in MAINFRAME computers. 

Interrupts and Exceptions 

Interrupt – Signal typically triggered by an I/O Device. Processor sends a interrupt to stop and process the I/O device 

Exception – Error that is planned for 

Trap – Generated by software; Intentional 

Fault – Error caused by attempting to access privileged memory; Unintentional 

Abort – Used to report severe errors 

Buses and Traces 

Buses – Logical portion that sends data over the trace 

Trace – The actual, physical lines, on the motherboard 

Address Line – Specifies the location of where data should be read from or written to 

Data Line – Coordinates the transfer of data. More than one line 

Control Line – Transmits commands/controls 

Power Line – Delivers Power 

Interface is the connection point from an EXTERNAL DEVICE to the BUS 

Maskable vs. Non-maskable 

Masked – When an interrupt is disabled or CPU says to ignore 

Non-Maskable Interrupt (NMI) - Used for critical hardware errors; Cannot be ignored 

Direct Memory Access 

Direct Memory Access (DMA) - Allows the I/O device to access memory without using the processor 

Examples – Sound cards and USB use DMA 

How it works: 

- Device Sends request to the DMA Controller 
    
- DMA Accepts it and sends request to CPU to pause - (HLD request) 
    
- CPU Acknowledges the request 
    
- DMA takes control of the bus and transfers the information to/from memory 
    

X-86 

X86 Bus Architecture – Separates the memory from the rest of the I/O using bridges 

North Bridge – Memory 

South Bridge – Input and Output (I/O) 

*Bridge functions as a translator* 

Different Interfaces 

Small Computer System Interface (SCSI) - Multi-point parallel bus with devices daisy chained. Used commonly for HDD 

Parallel Port (IEEE-1284) - Point-to-Point Parallel Communications 

Serial Advanced Technology Attachment (SATA) - Connect mass storage devices 

Serial Port (RS-232) - Point-to-Point Serial Communications 

Peripheral Component Interconnect Express (PCIe) - Expansion bus that allows a user to connect a computer to peripheral devices 

Universal Serial Bus (USB) - Can connect many types of peripherals; Ease-Of-Use has made the bus structuring more complex 

Video Graphics Array (VGA) - Standard analog video interface 

Digital Video Interface (DVI) - Video interface specialized for digital-to-digital connection – Designed to transmit uncompressed video 

High-Definition Multimedia Interface (HDMI) - Has an ethernet channel; Used by most modern displays and TVs. Typically 4k, but new ARC 2.1 can handle 8k. 

Display Port (DP) - Display interface used for connecting video source to display source. Better for multiple displays and has more bandwidth than HDMI. Supports up to 8k.